#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass Definitions/mdpi
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto-legacy
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "cochineal-ntxm" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts true
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command bibtex
\index_command default
\float_placement H
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize letter
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Predicting the magnitude of earthquakes using Grammatical Evolution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Constantina Kopitsa
\begin_inset Formula $^{1}$
\end_inset

,
 Ioannis G.
 Tsoulos
\begin_inset Formula $^{2,*}$
\end_inset

 and Vasileios Charilogis
\begin_inset Formula $^{3}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Author Names for PDF
Kopitsa,
 C.,
 Tsoulos,
 I.G.,
 Charilogs,
 V.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author Names for PDF
Constantina Kopitsa,
 Ioannis G.
 Tsoulos and Vasileios Charilogis.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author Names for Citation
Kopitsa,
 C.;
 Tsoulos,
 I.G.;
 Charilogis,
 V.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Address
\begin_inset Formula $^{1}$
\end_inset


\begin_inset space \quad{}
\end_inset

Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
 University of Ioannina,
 Greece;k.kopitsa@uoi.gr
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula $^{2}$
\end_inset


\begin_inset space \quad{}
\end_inset

Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
 University of Ioannina,
 Greece;
 itsoulos@uoi.gr
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula $^{3}\quad$
\end_inset

Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
 University of Ioannina,
 Greece;
 v.charilog@uoi.gr
\end_layout

\begin_layout Corresponding Author
Correspondence:
 itsoulos@uoi.gr
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Are earthquakes inherently unpredictable phenomena,
 or can they be forecasted through advances in technology?
 Contemporary seismological research continues to pursue this scientific milestone,
 often referred to as the ‘Holy Grail’ of earthquake prediction.
 In the direction of earthquake prediction based on historical data,
 the Law of Seismic Entropy Production proposed by S.
 Ts.
 Akopian has demonstrated high levels of predictive accuracy.
 Similarly,
 our research team follows this line of reasoning,
 operating under the belief that nature provides a pattern that,
 with the appropriate tools,
 can be decoded.
 What is certain is that,
 over the past 30 years,
 scientists and researchers have made significant strides in the field of seismology,
 largely aided by the development and application of artificial intelligence techniques.
 Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) were first applied in the domain of seismology in 1994.
 The introduction of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
 characterized by architectures incorporating two hidden layers,
 followed in 2002.
 Subsequently,
 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) were implemented within seismological studies as early as 2007.
 Most recently,
 Grammatical Evolution (GE) has been explored in this context,
 with its application emerging in 2025.
 Despite ongoing advancements,
 the so-called "triple prediction" accurately forecasting the time,
 location,
 and magnitude of a seismic event,
 remains unachieved.
 Beyond that Machine learning and soft computing techniques have maintained a longstanding presence in the field of seismology.
 Concerning these approaches,
 significant advancements have been achieved,
 both in mapping seismic patterns and in predicting seismic characteristics on a smaller geographical scale.
 In such a way,
 our research will analyze historical seismic events from 1970 to 2025,
 which will be categorized and classified,
 with the aim of employing Machine Learning techniques to achieve more accurate and timely predictions of earthquake magnitudes.
 Furthermore,
 in constructing our seismic dataset,
 we identified and categorized the lithospheric–tectonic plate associated with each seismic event.
 In addition,
 we incorporated the Kp index,
 which reflects geomagnetic storms occurring within the closest temporal window to each seismic event.
 This paper presents a systematic effort to apply Machine Learning techniques for estimating earthquake magnitudes,
 using various (ML) algorithms.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
